                      Nullsoft SHOUTcast 2.0 System Overview
                          (Last Updated 05 January 2011)


1.0  Overview of the SHOUTcast System
2.0  Example SHOUTcast System Setups
2.1    Summary



1.0   Overview of the SHOUTcast System
--------------------------------------

The SHOUTcast system is based around a 'client + server' configuration which allows you
to run a server (either directly or via a hosted service) which can provide a stream or
streams (if using a v2 server) of the 'source' connected to it to any clients which then
connect to the server.

The clients connect via a direct connection i.e. server <->> client where the main flow
of data (the stream data) will go from the server to the client.

The server itself will take a source for the stream which can be from the Transcoder 
(sc_trans) or Winamp + Source DSP (dsp_sc) or any other program which is able to provide
the stream data to the server in the required format (depending upon the mode the server
is being run in). Additionally the source could even be another server which then makes
our server into a relay server.

Once a source is connected to the server, the server will then allow clients to connect
to it and so the SHOUTcast system is running. An additional feature provided is the means
to list the stream in the SHOUTcast Radio Directory (otherwise known as the YP from its
earlier days which stands for YellowPages) which does as it is named by providing a
directory listing of streams which makes it easier for any clients to find your stream
and so be able to listen to it.

Important to note is that the YP will not do anything else other than providing some
information to the client such as a title, contact information i.e. a website to go to,
the genre of the stream (used for categorising the stream for easier finding) and so on
as provided to the YP from the server as well as providing the required url address of
your stream. This is no more different than placing a link on your own site to the url
address of your stream, it just happens to be listed in one place which makes it easier
for clients to find yours and other peoples streams.


2.0   Example SHOUTcast System Setups
-------------------------------------

Based on what we now know about the SHOUTcast system you could have one of the following
setups of tools to have a working SHOUTcast system.


Legend:
    «~»          -  A query made about the stream i.e. obtaining an url for it.
    → or ← or ↑  -  A direct connection where the direction of the arrow shows the
                    direction the connection happens e.g. from a source to the server.


Example 1: Source connected to a Server and listing on the YP for client connections

    Winamp + DSP  →  DNAS [sc_serv]  →         YP          «~»   Winamp
      (Source)          (Server)        (Radio Directory)       (Client)
                            ↑                                      |
                             ¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯


Example 2: Source connected to a Server with a client using a direct url e.g. via website

    Winamp + DSP  →  DNAS [sc_serv]  ←   Winamp
      (Source)          (Server)        (Client)


Example 3: Source connected to a Server with a client using a direct url
           Note: This shows how the source can be different but the client will not know.

    Transcoder  →  DNAS [sc_serv]  ←   Winamp
     (Source)         (Server)        (Client)


Example 4: Relaying a Server via your Server and listing on the YP for client connections

    DNAS [sc_serv]  →  DNAS [sc_serv]  →         YP          «~»   Winamp
       (Source)             (Server)      (Radio Directory)       (Client)
                                ↑                                     |
                                 ¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯

2.1   Summary
-------------

As can be seen from these examples there are a number of ways to provide a source to the
server (not accounting for 3rd party source programs) and for a client to connect to the
server. In all cases the connection from the client to the server is direct even if the
stream is listed on the YP and the client 'connects' to the stream via the YP entry.