                 Nullsoft SHOUTcast Source DSP Plug-in Version 2 (dsp_sc)
                              (Last Updated 07 October 2011)


1.0    Introduction
2.0    Getting Started
2.1      Installing the Plug-in
3.0    Configuration Window
3.1      Summary Tab
3.2      Output Tab
3.2.1      Login
3.2.2      Directory
3.2.3      Encoder
3.2.4      Titles
3.2.5      Artwork
3.2.6      Logs
3.3      Input Tab
3.3.1      Input Configuration
3.3.2      Soundcard Mixer Control
3.4      About Tab
3.4.1      Documentation and Support
4.0     Known Issues
4.1       Soundcard Mixer Control
5.0     SHOUTcast 2 Cipher Key



1.0   Introduction to dsp_sc
----------------------------

The aim of this document is to show you the different features offered by the SHOUTcast
Source DSP plug-in. The v2 of the plug-in is designed to work only on Winamp 5.5 and up
due to better api usage and integration with the player. If you want to use it with an
alternative player, then this will need to support all of the apis the plug-in may use.

The key feature of the plug-in is the ability to use Winamp as a source to a sc_serv or
sc_trans instance (or any other compatible tool which can accept SHOUTcast 1 or 2 data).

Additionally the plug-in will allow you to capture an audio input from the soundcard and
its line-in or microphone inputs (as shown in section 3.3.2).



2.0   Getting Started
---------------------

To get going with dsp_sc you will need to have already setup either a server (sc_serv) or
an alternative source to feed (like sc_trans which then feeds an sc_serv instance) and to
have all access enabled to allow a source to connect. The plug-in can be used as either a
full source or it can be used as a DJ connection in the case of being used with sc_trans.


2.1   Installing the Plug-in
----------------------------

The installer will detect the Winamp install on your machine and will then install it to
the correct location. If the detected Winamp version is prior to v5.5 or if there is no
winamp.exe present in the folder chosen then the installer will not continue.

Once installed then you will need to open Winamp and go to the following location:

    Preferences -> Plug-ins -> DSP/Effect

and select the 'Nullsoft SHOUTcast Source DSP' entry shown in the list of plug-ins.



3.0   Configuration Window
--------------------------

The configuration window is the main part of the plug-in and is where all information for
the connection to the server or the current status of the connection can be changed and
viewed.

Please note that when the configuration window is closed then any active connections will
be closed. If you want to hide the window then you can click use the minimise button on
the window and click on the notification area icon added when the minimise event occurs.


3.1   Summary Tab
-----------------

Status / Info : This will show information about the status of the 5 possible outputs the
                plug-in is able to provide going from not connected to current duration
                of the connection.

Note: If you double-click one of the output items you will be taken to the 'Output Tab'
      (see section 3.3) where the view will be changed to view the current settings for
      for output item picked.

Input Meters : This will show the left and right channel audio levels as is being passed
               through the plug-ins core which allows you to see if the input source is
               possibly not working or just to check the volume level on the source, etc.

Additionally, to the right is shown the currently selected input device (as chosen on the
'Input Tab' (see section 3.3)


3.2   Output Tab
----------------

This tab allows you to configure the 5 possible outputs the plug-in is able to generate
where the settings for each output are selected by clicking the 'Output X' item in the
list (where X is from 1 to 5).

Status : This will show the current information about the output source ranging from not
         being connected to error messages due to invalid passwords, etc.

Auto Connect : This will make the plug-in attempt to run this output as soon as it is
               started or when the option is checked if not already running when checked.

Connect / Abort /        : This allows you to start a connection, abort a connection try
Disconnect / Kill Button : or kill / disconnect an active connection. If 'Auto Connect'
                           is checked and you click this for a disconnect action then the
                           plug-in automatically re-starts the connection.


3.2.1   Login
-------------

Server Address : This is the address of the server to connect to and will depend upon the
                 setup which is being used. For example if the server or transcoder being
                 connected to are on the same machine then 'localhost' can be entered or
                 the exact IP of the machine for the DSP to attempt a connection to.

Port : This is the port related to the 'address' of the server to connect to. This needs
       to match 'portbase' (sc_serv2.txt - section 4.8) or 'serverport' (sc_trans.txt -
       section 3.11).

Stream ID : This is the identifier used to identify the source to the server when using a
            SHOUTcast 2 supporting setup. This needs to match 'streamid' (sc_serv2.txt -
            section 4.8) or 'uvoxstreamid' (sc_trans.txt - section 3.11).

      Note: This is disabled if 'Use SHOUTcast v1 mode (for legacy servers)' is checked.

DJ / User ID : This is the user id as specified on the server for the type of connection
               the plug-in is being asked to make. Examples of using this would be the
               'djlogin' value from sc_trans.txt - section 3.3 though this will all
               depend on the server configuration being used so if you have to connect to
               a server then you will most likely be provided with an id to use in this.

Password : This is the password required for accessing the server (if set on the server).
           This needs to match 'password' (sc_serv2.txt - section 4.8) or 'uvoxauth'
           (sc_trans.txt - section 3.11).

Automatic reconnection on : This will make the plug-in attempt to connect back to the
connection failure          server if there is a break in the connection.

Reconnection timeout : This is the number of seconds for the plug-in to wait in-between
                       any connection attempts which fail before it will try again.

Use SHOUTcast v1 mode : This controls the type of source the plug-in will try to create.
(for legacy servers)    With this checked then it will making an SHOUTcast 1 connection
                        otherwise it will attempt to make a SHOUTcast 2 connection (this
                        is the default behaviour on new installs of the plug-in).

                        Not setting the correct mode for the server you are attempting to
                        connect to will cause the connection attempt to fail or enter
                        into what appears to be a hung state where you are likely to see
                        a 'Cipher response received' if connecting in SHOUTcast 2 mode to
                        a SHOUTcast 1 server. If the plug-in determines this is likely to
                        have happened then the following will be shown in status area:

                        'Cipher response received
                         Try enabling 'SHOUTcast v1 mode'.'


When the SHOUTcast 2 mode is enabled then an information panel is displayed below these
options which shows the following message:

    Connecting to a SHOUTcast v1 server in
    non-legacy mode will likely cause the last
    status message to remain on "Cipher
    response received". To fix this you need to
    enable the "SHOUTcast v1 mode" above.


3.2.2   Directory
-----------------

Make this stream public : With this enabled, the stream will report that it wants to
(Recommended)             appear in the SHOUTcast Directory.

Name : This is the name you want to use for the source (often what will be used in
       SHOUTcast Directory listing).

URL : This is the url for the stream allowing listeners to view or get more information.

Genre : This is the genre for the source and is used to categorise the stream if listed
        on the SHOUTcast Directory listing. Select the genre from the arrow button menu.
        It is not possible to manually enter the genre and the input field is read-only.

Arrow Button : This will show a menu with known genres and sub-genres allowed for any
               SHOUTcast Directory listings. This will only be enabled if using v1 mode
               or if using SHOUTcast 2 mode and 'Make this stream public' is unchecked.

AIM / ICQ / IRC : These allow you to specify some contact information for clients though
                  support of these fields is only available when using v1 mode.


3.2.3   Encoder
---------------

This tab allows you to specify the encoder to be used to create the output stream from
the input stream the plug-in gets. The following encoders are available with the plug-in:

    MP3    (audio/mpeg)
    AAC    (audio/aacp)

The AAC (actually ADTS-AAC) encoding is provided by enc_aacplus.dll (Winamp 5.1 to 5.61)
or enc_fhgaac.dll (Winamp 5.62 and up). If this is not detected in the Winamp plug-ins
folder then only MP3 encoding will be shown as available.

Depending upon the encoder selected the 'encoder settings' section will provide different
options for controlling the settings of the encoder (usually a button to open an extra
configuration window or a dropdown list with fixed options to choose from).


3.2.4   Titles
--------------

This tab allows you to specify how the stream metadata is gathered be it from Winamp or
manually entered with the options provided.

Follow Winamp's title updates : This makes the DSP use Winamp's title updates for stream
                                title updates, sent in the appropriate format based on
                                the 'Use SHOUTcast v1 mode (for legacy servers)' setting.

Send next track title to : This sends the next track title to the server when using
the server (if available)  SHOUTcast 2 mode and the DSP can determine the next track.
                    Note : The current version of Winamp is always recommended to be used
                           due to improved support for this feature to work since v5.61.

Manual title updates : This will only send titles updates when 'Send Update' is pressed
                       which uses the custom title information entered into the 'now' and
                       'next' fields (which are enabled as applicable to the mode in use).

                 Note: The 'Send Update' button is enabled when there is a title entered
                       or it has changed since the existing title was entered. When using
                       SHOUTcast 2 the 'next' title field will become available as long
                       as title field has a title entered.


3.2.5   Artwork
---------------

This tab allows you to specify whether in-stream artwork will be sent to the SHOUTcast
server and if so then what type of artwork will be sent which can be for the station in
general as well as per file artwork (much like album art displays in media players).


Send in-stream artwork : Enables or disables sending of in-stream artwork.

                   Note: If this is enabled and then disabled, it is possible that the
                         plug-in will send some clear artwork messages after disabling
                         this option to ensure there is no artwork cached by the server.

Send artwork from the playing file : This sends artwork from the currently playing song
                    (if available)   to the server and acts in the same way as the album
                                     art view in most media players.

                              Notes: If unchecked or there is no artwork for the playing
                                     song then the SHOUTcast server may be sent a clear
                                     artwork message as applicable.

                                     This is sent as a PNG image to the SHOUTcast server.

Send artwork for stream branding : This will send the image as selected in the box below
                                   to the server to act as the station or stream image.

                             Note: If this is left empty then the server may be sent a
                                   clear artwork message as applicable.


Notes: Using the plug-in with a connection to a legacy server will cause the following
       notice to be shown:

       'Stream is setup for a SHOUTcast v1 server
        which does not support in-stream artwork.

        To send in-stream artwork, uncheck the
        "SHOUTcast v1 mode" option and ensure
        you connect to a SHOUTcast v2 server.'


       The plug-in is only able to send in-stream artwork upto 511 KiB (523680 bytes) in
       size due to the SHOUTcast 2 protocol specification for metadata packets. If this
       limit is reached then the artwork will not be sent and instead the server will get
       a clear artwork message.

       Viewing the in-stream artwork depends on native playback support of SHOUTcast v2
       streams in the player used by the client so without a compatible player the client
       will not be able to view it is as it is not available with SHOUTcast v1 streams.


3.2.6   Logs
------------

This tab allows you to specify the logging options of the status messages as shown at the
top of this page. Additionally it also provides the means to log the filepath of the next
tracks (if known) which are going to be played by Winamp with support for logging of the
track titles if using the xml output mode. 


By default the main logging options are not enabled though this can be used for tracking
problems with the plug-in such as if you are having connection issues to the server.

Enable logging of connection status messages : Enables or disables connection logging.

Clear log file on logging startup : This will reset the log everytime the plug-in starts.

Ignore 'Sent X bytes' status messages : This will not log any 'Sent X bytes' messages as
                                        shown in the status area of this page.

Open log file... : This will open the log file in the associated program for .log files.

Clear log file : This will clear the log file if it exists. It will not remove the file.


Enable next track logging : This will enable creating a log file (based on the following
                            options) of the known next tracks to be played by Winamp.

Save report as xml instead of plain text : Changing this will create the log as an xml
                                           file containing filepath and title with each
                                           item identified by the 'seq' attribute.

Notes: The next track logging is only updated when the plug-in detects a track change. As
       well if the plain text / xml mode is changed or the plug-in starts then the file
       contents will be cleared until the next track title change happens.


3.3   Input Tab
---------------

3.3.1   Input Configuration
---------------------------

Input Device : This allows you to choose between using Winamp or your soundcard (usually
               the line-in) as the input source for the output stream the plug-in makes.
               Depending upon the selection made additional options will be shown below.

Input Levels : This will show the left and right channel audio levels as is being passed
               through the plug-ins core which allows you to see if the input source is
               possibly not working or just to check the volume level on the source, etc.

Input Settings : When the soundcard input is selected then this allows for control over
                 the sample rate used on the input source.


3.3.2   Soundcard Mixer Control
-------------------------------

Choose Microphone : This will allow you to choose any of the input devices reported by
                    the OS for use with the microphone overlay mode the plug-in provides.

Refresh Button : This allows you to refresh the capture device list on Vista / Windows 7
                 (is disabled otherwise) since the plug-in was started. This is useful if
                 you have connected a device to the machine and now want to use it.

Open Mixer : This will open the operating systems recording and playback options (when
             using Windows 2000 / XP) which will allow you to change any required input
             and output settings for the system (though the amount you can change does
             depend upon the operating system being used - see section 4.0).

Music Level : This controls the Winamp output level (from no audio to full audio level).

BG Level : This controls the Winamp output level when the 'Push to Talk' option is active
           (from no audio to full audio level).

Mic Level : This controls the chosen microphone device's output level when the 'Push to
            Talk' option is active (from no audio to full audio level).

Fade Time : This controls the amount of time it takes for the audio to fade from the non
            'Push to Talk' mode to 'Push to Talk' being the active mode in usage (from no
            fade i.e. instantly changes to 2.5 second fade duration).

Capture Device Fade Time : This controls the amount of time it takes for the selected
                           capture device to fade from the non 'Push to Talk' mode to
                           'Push to Talk' being the active mode in usage (from no fade
                           i.e. instantly changes to 2.5 second fade duration).

Push to Talk : When this is pressed then the chosen microphone device becomes the active
               input source as used by any active output streams (see section 3.2). When
               enabled this button will appear in an activated state.

Lock : When this is pressed it will toggle the 'Push to Talk' mode on or off depending on
       the current state of this option when it pressed. When enabled this will appear in
       an activated state along with the 'Push to Talk' button.

Arrow Button : This will show a menu with the option "Enable 'Push to Talk' on startup"
               allowing for the mode to be re-enabled when the plug-in is started. This
               may be of use as the plug-in turns off the mode and sets the system levels
               back to the non-pushed mode when the plug-in's window is closed.


3.4   About Tab
---------------

This tab provides information about the version of the plug-in you are using - useful for
determining if you are using an older version of the plug-in or when reporting issues.


3.4.1   Documentation and Support
---------------------------------

This part of the tab provides links to access the online documentation and also for going
to the SHOUTcast support forum if issues are being experienced with the plug-in's usage.

The online documentation is typically the most current version of this file in an online
form as available via http://wiki.winamp.com/wiki/Source_DSP_Plug-in

The support forum is accessed via http://forums.winamp.com/forumdisplay.php?f=140



4.0   Known Issues
------------------

The following are currently known issue(s) to affect the currently released build of the
Source DSP plug-in:

4.1   Soundcard Mixer Control
-----------------------------

Issue: The soundcard mixer control does not work correctly or as expected on Vista /
       Windows 7 especially with the handling of the selected 'microphone' device due to
       changes in the audio system which prevent the capture handling from Windows 2000 /
       XP working in the same way. Windows 2000 / XP should still work as expected.

Workaround: The only obvious work around is to use the features the OS provides to enable
            the 'Listen to this device' option via the system's recording devices feature
            and then mix the levels with the controls the OS provides.

Expected Resolution: This issue is still being investigated and hopefully a solution will
                     be provided to allow for control of the input device in unison with
                     the selected 'microphone' device with-in the plug-ins interface when
                     using this mode.



5.0   SHOUTcast 2 Cipher Key
----------------------------

If you find that you do need to change the uvoxcipherkey (sc_serv2.txt - section 4.14) or
the djcipher (sc_trans.txt - section 3.0.3) in you sc_serv and / or sc_trans setups then
you can change the cipher key the DSP uses. You will only need to do this if you get the
following status message when making a connection:

    Authentication Error:
    Cipher Does Not Match

This is done currently via editing 'Cipherkey' entry in dsp_sc.ini in your Winamp config
folder where you just need to change the string after the equal sign to the value from
'uvoxcipherkey' or 'djcipher' depending upon what you are trying to connect to.

The dsp_sc.ini file can usually be found by entering %appdata%\Winamp\plugins into the
address bar in Windows Explorer. If it is not there then you should search for dsp_sc.ini
and make sure to have the search program you are using to look for hidden files (this is
just incase the OS is hiding the settings folder).